[docs][pythonic resources] Migrate resources doc to use Pythonic resources (#13246)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/concepts/resources.mdx

            username=EnvVar("MY_USERNAME"),
            password=EnvVar("MY_PASSWORD"),
        )
    },
)
```

### Configuring resources at runtime

In some cases, you may want to specify configuration for a resource at runtime, in the launchpad or in a <PyObject object="RunRequest" /> for a [schedule](/concepts/partitions-schedules-sensors/schedules) or [sensor](/concepts/partitions-schedules-sensors/sensors). For example, you may want a sensor-triggered run to specify a different target table in a database resource for each run.

You can use the `configure_at_launch()` method to defer the construction of a configurable resource until runtime.

```python file=/concepts/resources/pythonic_resources.py startafter=start_new_resource_runtime endbefore=end_new_resource_runtime dedent=4
from dagster import ConfigurableResource, Definitions, asset

class DatabaseResource(ConfigurableResource):
    table: str

    def read(self):
        ...

@asset
def data_from_database(db_conn: DatabaseResource):
    return db_conn.read()

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[data_from_database],
    resources={"db_conn": DatabaseResource.configure_at_launch()},
)
```

> #### Configuring a resource at runtime in Python code

Author: Updated the title to `Providing resource runtime configuration in Python code` - it's a follow-up to the above header which explains how to set up a resource to accept runtime configuration (`configure_at_launch`).

In this case, you can list that nested resource as an attribute of your resource class.

```python file=/concepts/resources/pythonic_resources.py startafter=start_new_resources_nesting endbefore=end_new_resources_nesting dedent=4
from dagster import Definitions, ConfigurableResource

class CredentialsResource(ConfigurableResource):
    username: str
    password: str

class FileStoreBucket(ConfigurableResource):
    credentials: CredentialsResource
    region: str

    def write(self, data: str):
        get_filestore_client(
            username=self.credentials.username,
            password=self.credentials.password,
            region=self.region,
        ).write(data)

credentials = CredentialsResource(username="my_user", password="my_password")
defs = Definitions(
    assets=[my_asset],
    resources={
        "bucket": FileStoreBucket(
            credentials=credentials,
            region="us-east-1",
        ),
    },
)
```

> If we instead would like the configuration for our credentials to be provided at runtime, we can use the `configure_at_launch()` method to defer the construction of the `CredentialsResource` until runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If instead you'd like the configuration for credentials to be provided at runtime, you can use the `configure_at_launch()` method to defer the construction of the `CredentialsResource` until runtime.
```

`we` > `you` to make it consistent with the rest of this section/guide

    assert MyResource(value="foo").get_value() == "foo"
```

If your resource requires other resources, then you can pass them as constructor arguments.

```python file=/concepts/resources/pythonic_resources.py startafter=start_new_resource_testing_with_context endbefore=end_new_resource_testing_with_context dedent=4
from dagster import ConfigurableResource

class StringHolderResource(ConfigurableResource):
    value: str

class MyResourceRequiresAnother(ConfigurableResource):
    foo: StringHolderResource
    bar: str

def test_my_resource_with_context():
    string_holder = StringHolderResource(value="foo")
    resource = MyResourceRequiresAnother(foo=string_holder, bar="bar")
    assert resource.foo.value == "foo"
    assert resource.bar == "bar"
```

---

## Defining Pythonic I/O managers

Pythonic [I/O managers](/concepts/io-management/io-managers) are defined as subclasses of <PyObject object="ConfigurableIOManager"/>, and similarly to Pythonic resources specify any configuration fields as attributes. Each subclass must implement a `handle_output` and `load_input` method, which are called by Dagster at runtime to handle the storing and loading of data.

> If you are interested in adapting a legacy, function-styled I/O manager, see the [adapting function-style I/O managers section](#adapting-function-style-io-managers).

Reviewer: Is the `function-styled I/O manager` section supposed to be on this page? I checked out the legacy page and didn't see it, so perhaps this was an oversight?

Author: Good catch, will offload that to the migration guide.

| <PyObject object="ConfigurableResource"/>        | The base class extended to define resources. Under the hood, implements <PyObject object="ResourceDefinition" />.                                                                                                                       |
| <PyObject object="ResourceParam"/>               | An annotation used to specify that a plain Python object parameter for an op or asset is a resource.                                                                                                                                    |
| <PyObject object="ResourceDefinition" />         | Class for resource definitions. You almost never want to use initialize this class directly. Instead, you should extend the <PyObject object="ConfigurableResource" /> class which implements <PyObject object="ResourceDefinition" />. |
| <PyObject object="InitResourceContext"/>         | The context object provided to a resource during initialization. This object contains required resource, config, and other run information.                                                                                             |

> | <PyObject object="build_init_resource_context"/> | Function for building an <PyObject object="InitResourceContext"/> outside of execution, intended to be used when testing a resource.                                                                                                    |

Author: Updated - I added a `with_resource_context` binding utility in https://github.com/dagster-io/dagster/pull/13613 that I used in the example here.

| <PyObject object="build_resources"/>             | Function for initializing a set of resources outside of the context of a job's execution.                                                                                                                                               |
| <PyObject object="with_resources"/>              | Function for providing resources to software-defined assets and source assets.                                                                                                                                                          |

---

## Defining a resource

> Typically, resources are defined by subclassing <PyObject object="ConfigurableResource"/>. Attributes on the class are used to define the resource's [configuration schema](/concepts/configuration/config-schema). The configuration system has a few advantages over plain Python parameter passing; configured values are displayed in the Dagster UI and can be set dynamically using environment variables.

Reviewer 2: Another advantage is that one can delay the binding of values to configurable at launch-time.

import requests
from requests import Response

class MyConnectionResource(ConfigurableResource):
    username: str

    def request(self, endpoint: str) -> Response:
        return requests.get(
            f"https://my-api.com/{endpoint}",
            headers={"user-agent": "dagster"},
        )

@op
def update_service(my_conn: MyConnectionResource):
    my_conn.request("/update")

@job
def update_service_job():
    update_service()

defs = Definitions(
    jobs=[update_service_job],
    resources={
        "my_conn": MyConnectionResource(username="my_user"),
    },
)
```

</TabItem>
</TabGroup>

There are many supported config types that can be used when defining resources. See the [advanced config types documentation](/concepts/configuration/advanced-config-types) for a more comprehensive overview on the available config types.

### Using environment variables with resources

Resources can be configured using environment variables, which is useful for secrets or other environment-specific configuration. If you're using Dagster Cloud, environment variables can be [configured directly in the UI](/dagster-cloud/managing-deployments/environment-variables-and-secrets).

> To use environment variables, pass an <PyObject object="EnvVar" /> when constructing your resource.

Reviewer 2: Say `EnvVar` inherits from `str` and can be used on any `str` attribute.

```python file=/concepts/resources/pythonic_resources.py startafter=start_new_resources_env_vars endbefore=end_new_resources_env_vars dedent=4
from dagster import EnvVar, Definitions, ConfigurableResource

class CredentialsResource(ConfigurableResource):
    username: str
    password: str

defs = Definitions(
    assets=...,
    resources={
        "credentials": CredentialsResource(
            username=EnvVar("MY_USERNAME"),
            password=EnvVar("MY_PASSWORD"),
        )
    },
)
```

For more information on using environment variables with Dagster, refer to the [Environment variables guide](/guides/dagster/using-environment-variables-and-secrets).

> ### Configuring resources at runtime

Reviewer 2: IMO we should change our language from "runtime" to "launch time" in order to disambiguate from when the python code is running to create definitions, which is also "runtime" from a different POV.

```

### Resources which depend on other resources

In some situations, you may want to define a resource which depends on other resources. This is useful for common configuration. For example, separate resources for a database and for a filestore may both depend on credentials for a particular cloud provider. Defining these credentials as a separate, nested resource allows you to specify configuration in a single place. It also makes it easier to test your resources, since you can mock the nested resource.

In this case, you can list that nested resource as an attribute of your resource class.

```python file=/concepts/resources/pythonic_resources.py startafter=start_new_resources_nesting endbefore=end_new_resources_nesting dedent=4
from dagster import Definitions, ConfigurableResource

class CredentialsResource(ConfigurableResource):
    username: str
    password: str

class FileStoreBucket(ConfigurableResource):
    credentials: CredentialsResource
    region: str

    def write(self, data: str):
        get_filestore_client(
            username=self.credentials.username,
            password=self.credentials.password,
            region=self.region,
        ).write(data)

> credentials = CredentialsResource(username="my_user", password="my_password")

Reviewer 2: nit: assigning to intermediate variable does not seem necessary

| <PyObject object="with_resources"/>              | Function for providing resources to software-defined assets and source assets.                                                                                                                                                          |

---

## Defining a resource

Typically, resources are defined by subclassing <PyObject object="ConfigurableResource"/>. Attributes on the class are used to define the resource's [configuration schema](/concepts/configuration/config-schema). The configuration system has a few advantages over plain Python parameter passing; configured values are displayed in the Dagster UI and can be set dynamically using environment variables.

Assets and ops specify resource dependencies by annotating the resource as a parameter to the asset or op function.

To provide resource values to your assets and ops, attach them to your <PyObject object="Definitions" /> call. These resources are automatically passed to the function at runtime.

<TabGroup persistentKey="assetsorops">
<TabItem name="Using software-defined-assets">

> #### Using software-defined assets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using software-defined assets
```

Here, we define a subclass of <PyObject object="ConfigurableResource"/> representing a connection to an external service. We can configure the resource by constructing it in the <PyObject object="Definitions" /> call.

We can define methods on the resource class which depend on config values. These methods can be used by assets and ops.

```python file=/concepts/resources/pythonic_resources.py startafter=start_new_resources_configurable_defs endbefore=end_new_resources_configurable_defs dedent=4
from dagster import asset, Definitions, ConfigurableResource
import requests
from requests import Response

class MyConnectionResource(ConfigurableResource):
    username: str

    def request(self, endpoint: str) -> Response:
        return requests.get(
            f"https://my-api.com/{endpoint}",
            headers={"user-agent": "dagster"},
        )

@asset
def data_from_service(my_conn: MyConnectionResource) -> Dict[str, Any]:
    return my_conn.request("/fetch_data").json()

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[data_from_service],
    resources={
        "my_conn": MyConnectionResource(username="my_user"),
    },
)
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem name="Using ops and jobs">

> #### Using ops

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using ops and jobs
```

Should this heading match the tab label?

In this case, you can list that nested resource as an attribute of your resource class.

```python file=/concepts/resources/pythonic_resources.py startafter=start_new_resources_nesting endbefore=end_new_resources_nesting dedent=4
from dagster import Definitions, ConfigurableResource

class CredentialsResource(ConfigurableResource):
    username: str
    password: str

class FileStoreBucket(ConfigurableResource):
    credentials: CredentialsResource
    region: str

    def write(self, data: str):
        get_filestore_client(
            username=self.credentials.username,
            password=self.credentials.password,
            region=self.region,
        ).write(data)

credentials = CredentialsResource(username="my_user", password="my_password")
defs = Definitions(
    assets=[my_asset],
    resources={
        "bucket": FileStoreBucket(
            credentials=credentials,
            region="us-east-1",
        ),
    },
)
```

If we instead would like the configuration for our credentials to be provided at runtime, we can use the `configure_at_launch()` method to defer the construction of the `CredentialsResource` until runtime.

> Because `credentials` requires runtime configuration through the launchpad, it must also be passed to the `Definitions` object, so that configuration can be provided at runtime. Nested resources only need to be passed to the `Definitions` object if they require runtime configuration.

Reviewer: Could you use the `PyObject` for `Definitions` in here, pls?

```python file=/concepts/resources/pythonic_resources.py startafter=start_new_resource_testing endbefore=end_new_resource_testing dedent=4
from dagster import ConfigurableResource

class MyResource(ConfigurableResource):
    value: str

    def get_value(self) -> str:
        return self.value

def test_my_resource():
    assert MyResource(value="foo").get_value() == "foo"
```

If your resource requires other resources, then you can pass them as constructor arguments.

```python file=/concepts/resources/pythonic_resources.py startafter=start_new_resource_testing_with_context endbefore=end_new_resource_testing_with_context dedent=4
from dagster import ConfigurableResource

class StringHolderResource(ConfigurableResource):
    value: str

class MyResourceRequiresAnother(ConfigurableResource):
    foo: StringHolderResource
    bar: str

def test_my_resource_with_context():
    string_holder = StringHolderResource(value="foo")
    resource = MyResourceRequiresAnother(foo=string_holder, bar="bar")
    assert resource.foo.value == "foo"
    assert resource.bar == "bar"
```

---

## Defining Pythonic I/O managers

> Pythonic [I/O managers](/concepts/io-management/io-managers) are defined as subclasses of <PyObject object="ConfigurableIOManager"/>, and similarly to Pythonic resources specify any configuration fields as attributes. Each subclass must implement a `handle_output` and `load_input` method, which are called Dagster at runtime to handle the storing and loading of data.

Reviewer: > Each subclass must implement a `handle_output` and `load_input` method, which are called Dagster at runtime to handle the storing and loading of data.

... "which are called **by** Dagster at runtime"?

```python file=/concepts/resources/pythonic_resources.py startafter=start_new_io_manager endbefore=end_new_io_manager dedent=4
from dagster import (
    Definitions,
    AssetKey,
    OutputContext,
    InputContext,
    ConfigurableIOManager,
)

class MyIOManager(ConfigurableIOManager):
    root_path: str

    def _get_path(self, asset_key: AssetKey) -> str:
        return self.root_path + "/".join(asset_key.path)

    def handle_output(self, context: OutputContext, obj):
        write_csv(self._get_path(context.asset_key), obj)

    def load_input(self, context: InputContext):
        return read_csv(self._get_path(context.asset_key))

defs = Definitions(
    assets=...,
    resources={"io_manager": MyIOManager(root_path="/tmp/")},
)
```

> ## Advanced resource patterns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---

## Advanced resource patterns
```

The adapter subclass should list all config fields as attributes and implement a `wrapped_resource` property which returns the underlying resource definition to adapt.

```python file=/concepts/resources/pythonic_resources.py startafter=start_resource_adapter endbefore=end_resource_adapter dedent=4
from dagster import (
    resource,
    Definitions,
    ResourceDefinition,
    asset,
    ConfigurableLegacyResourceAdapter,
)

# Old code, interface cannot be changed for back-compat purposes
class Writer:
    def __init__(self, prefix: str):
        self._prefix = prefix

    def output(self, text: str) -> None:
        print(self._prefix + text)

@resource(config_schema={"prefix": str})
def writer_resource(context):
    prefix = context.resource_config["prefix"]
    return Writer(prefix)

# New adapter layer
class WriterResource(ConfigurableLegacyResourceAdapter):
    prefix: str

    @property
    def wrapped_resource(self) -> ResourceDefinition:
        return writer_resource

@asset
def my_asset(writer: Writer):
    writer.output("hello, world!")

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[my_asset], resources={"writer": WriterResource(prefix="greeting: ")}
)
```

> ### Adapting function-style I/O managers

Reviewer: Should the `Defining Pythonic I/O managers` section link to this section? Something like "If you're utilizing function-style I/O managers, [click here for more info]"?

Author: Good idea, added!
